The Operational Guidelines provide a detailed timetable for the submission and evaluation of nominations, which is binding on States Parties and the Advisory Bodies.
The key deadlines are absolute and non-negotiable.
A nominated property may be independently evaluated by one or both of the two Advisory Bodies mandated by the World Heritage Convention: ICOMOS (International Council on Monuments and Sites) for cultural properties and IUCN (International Union for Conservation of Nature) for natural properties.
The third Advisory Body is ICCROM (International Centre for the Study of the Preservation and Restoration of Cultural Property), an intergovernmental organization which provides the Committee with expert advice on conservation and monitoring of cultural sites, as well as on training and capacity-building activities.
Once a property has been nominated and evaluated, it is up to the intergovernmental World Heritage Committee to make the final decision on its inscription.
Once a year, the Committee meets to decide which properties will be inscribed on the World Heritage List.
In addition to inscribing a property or deciding not to inscribe, the Committee can also defer or refer the nomination and request further information on a property from the relevant State Party.
The World Heritage Centre (WHC) is the Secretariat of the World Heritage Convention and the focal point and coordinator within UNESCO for all matters relating to World Heritage.
WHC provides assistance to States Parties throughout the preparation of nominations in different ways, among others it provides examples of successful nominations, of management and legislative provisions, helps in identifying appropriate maps, gives more specific guidance for nominating different types of properties, such as cultural landscapes, towns, canals, and heritage routes or for nominating serial and transboundary properties.
In cooperation with the Advisory Bodies and other institutions, WHC organizes specific workshops on issues linked to the preparation of nominations.
The Centre also provides comments and guidance when States Parties submit draft nominations to the Secretariat.
The Centre updates the World Heritage List and database.
When an official nomination is submitted, WHC checks the file for completeness and if the nomination is considered as complete, the Centre transmits the file to the appropriate Advisory Body, while, if the nomination is considered incomplete, the Centre gives guidance to the State Party on how to complete it.
This section provides illustrations of some key World Heritage concepts including definitions, criteria and different types of properties.
The World Heritage Convention defines cultural heritage as: monuments: architectural works, works of monumental sculpture and painting, elements or structures of an archaeological nature, inscriptions, cave dwellings and combinations offeatures, which are of Outstanding Universal Value from the point of view of history, art or science; groups of buildings.
Groups of separate or connected buildings which, because of their architecture, their homogeneity or their place in the landscape, are of Outstanding Universal Value from the point of view of history, art or science.
Sites: works of man or the combined works of nature and man, and areas including archaeological sites which are of Outstanding Universal Value from the historical, aesthetic, ethnological or anthropological point of view (Article 1).
Some properties might satisfy more than one of these definitions (e.g.be both a monument and group of buildings).
This definition was developed in 1972 and concepts of cultural heritage have expanded since that time.
Nonetheless, the definition has been interpreted very broadly to embrace the diversity of cultural heritage.
The Operational Guidelines offer additional definitions regarding cultural landscapes, historic towns and town centres, heritage canals and heritage routes.
Cultural landscapes are also discussed further in the following section.
Some examples of listed properties below give a sense of the scope of cultural heritage (text and illustrations for these definitions are drawn from the UNESCO World Heritage website).
An architectural work and archaeological site.
The 65 m Minaret of Jam is a graceful, soaring structure, dating back to the XII century.
Covered in elaborate brickwork with a blue tile inscription at the top, it is noteworthy for the quality of its architecture and decoration, which represent the culmination of an architectural and artistic tradition in this region.
Its impact is heightened by its dramatic setting, a deep river valley between towering mountains in the heart of Ghur province.
Sukur Cultural Landscape, with the Palace of the Hidi (chief) on a hill dominating the villages below, the terraced fields and their sacred symbols, and the extensive remains of a former flourishing iron industry, is a remarkably intact physical expression of a society and its spiritual and material culture.
The Old Town of Lijiang, which is perfectly adapted to the uneven topography of this key commercial and strategic site, has retained a historic townscape of high quality and authenticity.
Its architecture is noteworthy for the blending of elements from several cultures that have come together over many centuries.
Lijiang also possesses an ancient water supply system of great complexity and ingenuity that still functions effectively today.
A group of buildings and industrial archaeological site.
The Zollverein industrial complex in Land NordrheinWestfalen consists of the complete infrastructure of a historical coal-mining site, with some XX century buildings of outstanding architectural merit.
It constitutes remarkable material evidence of the evolution and decline of an essential industry over the past 150 years.
A monument / work of monumental painting and site.
The Cueva de las Manos, Río Pinturas, contains an exceptional assemblage of cave art, executed between 13000 and 9500 years ago.
It takes its name (Cave of the Hands) from the stencilled outlines of human hands in the cave, but there are also many depictions of animals, such as guanacos (Lama guanicoe), still commonly found in the region, as well as hunting scenes.
The people responsible for the paintings may have been the ancestors of the historic hunter-gatherer communities of Patagonia found by European settlers in the XIX century.
The Hiroshima Peace Memorial (Genbaku Dome) was the only structure left standing in the area where the first atomic bomb exploded on 6 August 1945.
Through the efforts of many people, including those of the city of Hiroshima, it has been preserved in the same state as immediately after the bombing.
Not only is it a stark and powerful symbol of the most destructive force ever created by humankind, it also expresses the hope for world peace and the ultimate elimination of all nuclear weapons.
The world’s first botanical garden was created in Padua in 1545.
It still preserves its original layout – a circular central plot, symbolizing the world, surrounded by a ring of water.
Other elements were added later, some architectural (ornamental entrances and balustrades) and some practical (pumping installations and greenhouses).
It continues to serve its original purpose as a centre for scientific research.
The World Heritage Convention defines natural heritage as: natural features consisting of physical and biological formations or groups of such formations, which are of Outstanding Universal Value from the aesthetic or scientific point of view. 
Geological and physiographical formations and precisely delineated areas which constitute the habitat of threatened species of animals and plants of Outstanding Universal Value from the point of view of science or conservation.
Natural sites or precisely delineated natural areas of Outstanding Universal Value from the point of view of science, conservation or natural beauty.
A few examples of listed properties below give a sense of the scope of natural heritage.
Sagarmatha is an exceptional area with dramatic mountains, glaciers and deep valleys, dominated by Mount Everest, the highest peak in the world (8848 m).
Several rare species, such as the snow leopard and the lesser panda, are found in the park.
The presence of the Sherpas, with their unique culture, adds further interest to this site.
Located on the west coast of Greenland, 250 km north of the Arctic Circle, Greenland’s Ilulissat Icefjord is the sea mouth of Sermeq Kujalleq, one of the few glaciers through which the Greenland ice cap reaches the sea.
Sermeq Kujalleq is one of the fastest (19 m per day) and most active glaciers in the world.
It annually calves over 35 km3 of ice, i.e.10 per cent of the production of all Greenland calf ice and more than any other glacier outside Antarctica.
Studied for over 250 years, it has helped to develop our understanding of climate change and icecap glaciology.
The combination of a huge ice-sheet and the dramatic sounds of a fast-moving glacial ice-stream calving into a fjord covered by icebergs makes for a dramatic and awe-inspiring natural phenomenon.
Joggins Fossil Cliffs, a 689 ha palaeontological site along the coast of Nova Scotia (eastern Canada), have been described as the “coal age Galápagos” due to their wealth of fossils from the Carboniferous period (354 to 290 million years ago).
The rocks of this site are considered to be iconic for this period of the history of Earth and are the world’s thickest and most comprehensive record of the Pennsylvanian strata (dating back 318 to 303 million years) with the most complete known fossil record of terrestrial life from that time.
These include the remains and tracks of very early animals and the rainforest in which they lived, left in situ, intact and undisturbed.
With its 14.7 km of sea cliffs, low bluffs, rock platforms and beach, the site groups remains of three ecosystems: estuarine bay, floodplain rainforest and fire prone forested alluvial plain with freshwater pools.
It offers the richest assemblage known of the fossil life in these three ecosystems with 96 genera and 148 species of fossils and 20 footprint groups.
The site is listed as containing outstanding examples representing major stages in the history of the Earth.
Located c.500 km off the coast of Colombia, the site includes Malpelo island (350 ha) and the surrounding marine environment (857150 ha).
This vast marine park, the largest nofishing zone in the Eastern Tropical Pacific, provides a critical habitat for internationally threatened marine species, and is a major source of nutrients resulting in large aggregations of marine biodiversity.
It is in particular a “reservoir” for sharks, giant grouper and billfish, and is one of the few places in the world where sightings of the short-nosed ragged-toothed shark, a deepwater shark, have been confirmed.
Widely recognized as one of the top diving sites in the world, due to the steep walls and caves of outstanding natural beauty, these deep waters support important populations of large predators and pelagic species (e.g.aggregations of over 200 hammerhead sharks and over 1000 silky sharks, whale sharks and tuna have been recorded) in an undisturbed environment where they maintain natural behavioural patterns.